



Limited Additional Mechanisms for PKIX and SMIME            H. Birge-Lee
Internet-Draft                                            G. Cimaszewski
Intended status: Experimental                           C. E. Kr채henb체hl
Expires: 3 August 2025                                           L. Wang
                                                    Princeton University
                                                                A. Gable
                                                                    ISRG
                                                               P. Mittal
                                                    Princeton University
                                                         30 January 2025


          CAA Security Tag for Cryptographic Domain Validation
                draft-birgelee-lamps-caa-security-latest

Abstract

   Cryptographic domain validation procedures leverage authenticated
   communication channels to ensure resilience against attacks by both
   on-path and off-path network adversaries which may be located between
   the CA and the network resources related to the domain contained in
   the certificate.  Domain owners can leverage "security" Property Tags
   specified in CAA records (defined in [RFC8659]) with the critical
   flag set, to ensure that CAs perform cryptographic domain validation
   during their issuance procedure, hence defending against global man-
   in-the-middle adversaries.  This document defines the syntax of the
   CAA security Property as well as acceptable means for cryptographic
   domain validation procedures.

About This Document

   This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   The latest revision of this draft can be found at
   https://birgelee.github.io/draft-caa-security-tag/draft-birgelee-
   lamps-caa-security.html.  Status information for this document may be
   found at https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-birgelee-lamps-caa-
   security/.

   Discussion of this document takes place on the Limited Additional
   Mechanisms for PKIX and SMIME Working Group mailing list
   (mailto:spasm@ietf.org), which is archived at
   https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/browse/spasm/.  Subscribe at
   https://www.ietf.org/mailman/listinfo/spasm/.

   Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
   https://github.com/birgelee/draft-caa-security-tag.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 3 August 2025.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2025 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
   2.  Conventions and Definitions
     2.1.  Cryptographic Domain Validation
       2.1.1.  Threat Model
       2.1.2.  Secure Policy Lookup
       2.1.3.  Downgrade Prevention
   3.  CAA security Property
     3.1.  Syntax
     3.2.  Well-known Attributes
       3.2.1.  Permissible Methods
       3.2.2.  Permissible Options
     3.3.  Co-existence with other CAA Properties
       3.3.1.  CAA security Property
       3.3.2.  CAA issue and issuewild Property
       3.3.3.  CAA iodef Property
   4.  Security Considerations
   5.  IANA Considerations
   6.  Normative References
   Acknowledgments
   Authors' Addresses

1.  Introduction

   A CAA security Property Tag is compliant with [RFC8659] and puts
   restrictions on the circumstances under which a CA is allowed to sign
   a certificate for a given domain.  A security Property Tag on a
   domain implies that validation for this domain must be done in a
   manner that defends against network adversaries even if an adversary
   is capable of intercepting and/or modifying communication between the
   CA and the network resources related to the domain being validated.
   Issuance of a certificate to a domain with a security Property Tag
   MUST follow one of the specified Cryptographic Domain Validation
   (CDV) methods outlined in this document or future extensions.  CDV
   methods MUST rely on cryptographic protocols (like DNSSEC or DoH/DoT)
   that offer security properties even in the presence of man-in-the-
   middle adversaries that can intercept any communication occurring
   over the public Internet.

   Not all CDV methods are themselves compliant with the CA/Browser
   Forum's Baseline Requirements for the Issuance and Management of
   Publicly-Trusted TLS Server Certificates.  Hence, any CDV method that
   does not meet the CA/Browser Forum Baseline Requirements for TLS
   server certificate issuance must be used in conjunction with such a
   compliant domain validation method.

2.  Conventions and Definitions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
   BCP 14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

2.1.  Cryptographic Domain Validation

   The goal of cryptographic domain validation is to ensure that domain
   validation is based on communication channels that are authenticated
   through cryptographic operations.

2.1.1.  Threat Model

   Cryptographic domain validation defends against a network adversary
   that can block, intercept, modify, and forge arbitrary network
   packets sent between a CA and the domain's network resources, but
   cannot forge cryptographic objects, such as signatures and encrypted
   data.  Cryptographic domain validation is based on DNS and thus
   assumes that a domain owner can securely mange their DNS records,
   i.e., communication between the domain owner and their DNS
   infrastructure is protected against network adversaries.  Similarly,
   communication between the entity generating the private key and
   requesting the certificate, e.g., the domain owner, and the
   webserver(s) where the private key and certificate are installed, is
   assumed to be protected against network adversaries.  Furthermore, it
   assumes that all CAs are benign and correctly follow all necessary
   validation procedures as described in the relevant standardization
   documents.

   Cryptographic domain validation can be used on domains that are
   contained in both domain validation certificates (where only the
   domain name in a certificate is validated) and extended or
   organization validated certificates (where information like
   organization identity as well as domain name is validated).
   Cryptographic domain validation only hardens the security of the
   validation of domain names, not broader identities (e.g.,
   organization names).  The use of cryptographic domain validation in
   an OV or EV certificate only improves the validation of the domain
   name(s) contained in the certificate (in the common name or subject-
   alternate names fields) and does not impact the validation of other
   forms of identity contained in the certificate.  Use of cryptographic
   domain validation in a DV certificate does not imply validation of
   any identity beyond the domain name(s) in the certificate.

   The defense involves the domain owner specifying a policy indicating
   their desire for cryptographic domain validation via DNS CAA records
   and securely communicating these records to all CAs.  Hence, a core
   aspect of cryptographic domain validation is 1) ensuring secure
   policy lookups, and 2) preventing downgrade attacks that convince a
   CA to issue a certificate using non-cryptographic domain validation.

2.1.2.  Secure Policy Lookup

   The authenticity of the retrieved security CAA record SHOULD be
   protected to prevent an active network adversary from modifying its
   content.  Authenticity can either be ensured by signing the security
   CAA record or by retrieving the security CAA record via an
   authenticated channel.  Any security CAA record not protected by such
   a signature or authenticated channel MAY not benefit from the
   security properties outlined in this document.

2.1.2.1.  Signed Record

   A security CAA record SHOULD be protected with a valid DNSSEC
   signature chain going back to the ICANN DNSSEC root, to prove the
   authenticity of the record and its content.

2.1.2.2.  Authenticated Channel

   If it is not possible to have a DNSSEC signature chain back to the
   ICANN root, security CAA records SHOULD alternately be hosted on an
   authoritative DNS resolver that supports recursive-to-authoritative
   authenticated channels.  Authenticated channels between recursive and
   authoritative nameservers could be deployed as described in [RFC9539]
   and leverage DoT, DoQ, or DoH as protocols providing an authenticated
   channel.  Since secure policy lookup considers a more stringent
   threat model than the passive network adversary in [RFC9539], the
   deployment MUST also implement defenses against active adversaries
   highlighted in Appendix B of [RFC9539].  One option to implement
   these defenses is by creating DNSSEC-protected SVCB DNS records at
   the authoritative nameserver.  These SVCB records provide a signaling
   mechanism for authoritative nameservers offering authenticated
   channel.  Furthermore, the authenticity of the TLS certificate public
   key used to establish the channel MUST be protected, e.g., by
   specifying the public key hash as an SVCB parameter.  This step is
   crucial to achieve our desired security properties, since it
   eliminates the circular dependency of requiring an authentic TLS
   certificate to secure the issuance of new TLS certificate.

2.1.3.  Downgrade Prevention

   To ensure that the CAA security Property is immediately and
   incrementally deployable without requiring all publicly-trusted CAs
   to understand the property, the CAA record containing the property
   MUST set the critical flag.

   Serving security CAA records over authenticated DNS channels or using
   authenticated DNS records (i.e., DNSSEC) is critical to the
   effectiveness of the records because a security CAA record not
   protected by authenticated DNS may be suppressed by an adversary that
   can manipulate DNS responses.  This could potentially allow the
   adversary to downgrade validation to use a low-security method and
   undermine the security properties of the security Property Tag.

   If DNSSEC is used to authenticate the CAA record, a CA MUST only
   accept the non-existence of a security CAA record if its non-
   existence is proven by NSEC record as described in [RFC7129].

   If authenticated channels are used to authenticate the CAA record,
   CAs MUST also require recursive-to-authoritative DoT or DoH
   communication (and not permit standard unencrypted DNS connections)
   for DNS providers that host security CAA records.  This prevents
   downgrade attacks where an adversary attempts to interfere with the
   establishment of a DoT or DoH encrypted channel and cause a fallback
   to unencrypted DNS over UDP or TCP.

3.  CAA security Property

   The CAA security Property Tag MUST be "security" and the flags field
   of a CAA record containing the security Property MUST have the
   critical bit set.  In this document, we refer to a CAA record with
   these characteristics as a *security CAA record*.

3.1.  Syntax

   The CAA security Property Value has the following sub-syntax
   (specified in ABNF as per [RFC5234]).

   security-value = *WSP [attribute-list] *WSP

   attribute-list = (attribute *WSP ";" *WSP attribute-list) / attribute

   attribute = attribute-name *WSP "=" *WSP attribute-value

   attribute-name = (ALPHA / DIGIT) *( *("-") (ALPHA / DIGIT))

   attribute-value = *(%x21-3A / %x3C-7E)

   Hence, the security Property Value can either be empty or entirely
   whitespace, or contain a list of semicolon-separated attribute name-
   value pairs.

   Similar to [RFC8659], attribute names are specified in letter-digit-
   hyphen Label (LDH-Label) form while attribute values can contain any
   printable character except semicolon.

   All attributes specified in an attribute-list MUST be unique.  An
   attribute-list MUST NOT have two attributes with the same name
   specified even if they contain different attribute values.

3.2.  Well-known Attributes

   The attribute-list MAY contain the following attributes.

   The attribute values of the attributes specified in this document
   have the following sub-syntax (specified in ABNF as per [RFC5234]).

   well-known-attribute-value = *WSP comma-sep-list *WSP

   comma-sep-list = (list-item *WSP "," *WSP comma-sep-list) / list-item

   list-item = *(%x21-2B / %x2D-3A / %x3C-7E)

   1.  *methods:* If specified, this attribute MUST have a non-empty
       comma-separated list of cryptographic domain validation methods
       that can be used to validate that particular domain.  A CA MUST
       use one of the methods specified in the methods attribute value
       to perform cryptographic domain validation.  If there is no
       method specified that the CA is capable of complying with, the CA
       MUST deny issuance.

   2.  *options:* If specified, this attribute MUST have a non-empty
       comma-separated list of options.  A CA SHOULD try to honor any
       option specified in this list.  If a CA does not understand an
       option or does not have that option implemented the, CA MAY
       proceed with issuance.

   3.  *options-critical:* If specified, this attribute MUST have a non-
       empty comma-separated list of options.  To proceed with issuance,
       a CA MUST understand and implement all options specified in the
       options-critical attribute value.

   The attribute-list MAY contain additional attributes and a CA MAY
   proceed with issuance even if it does not understand these additional
   attributes.  Subsequent RFCs MAY standardize additional attributes.

3.2.1.  Permissible Methods

   The following attributes MAY be specified in the methods attribute
   value.  Each method specifies particular aspects of certificate
   issuance that MUST be satisfied for a certificate to be issued using
   that method.  While some methods entail the use of CA/Browser Forum-
   compliant domain control validation methods, others do not entail CA/
   Browser Forum-compliant domain control validation and must be used in
   conjunction with a CA/Browser Forum-compliant domain control
   validation method to permit certificate issuance.

   1.  *secure-dns-record-change:* This method involves an applicant
       showing control of a DNSSEC-protected DNS record or a record that
       was retrieved via a DoH or DoT tunnel to the relevant
       authoritative nameservers used in the DNS resolution.  This can
       be done via 1) the validation method "DNS Change" specified in
       the CA/Browser Forum's Baseline Requirements for the Issuance and
       Management of Publicly-Trusted TLS Server Certificates
       (Section 3.2.2.4.7) or 2) the "dns-01" method of the ACME RFC
       [RFC8555].  For this method to be satisfied, the FQDN where the
       DNS change is demonstrated MUST be protected by DNSSEC or lookups
       to the relevant authoritative nameservers MUST be conducted over
       authenticated channels (e.g., DoH/DoT).

   2.  *http-validation-over-tls:* This method involves the completion
       of an HTTP domain validation challenge over an HTTPS session
       using TCP port 443 where the server authenticates with an
       existing publicly-trusted valid certificate covering the domain
       in question.  The certificate cannot be self-signed or expired.
       This method MAY be directly satisfied while a CA is performing
       the "Agreed-Upon Change to Website v2" domain control validation
       method specified in the the CA/Browser Forum's Baseline
       Requirements for the Issuance and Management of Publicly-Trusted
       TLS Server Certificates (Section 3.2.2.4.18).  The ACME "http-01"
       challenge specified in [RFC8555] does not permit the use of HTTPS
       or port 443 when a CA is contacting the domain in question.  A CA
       MAY still satisfy the *http-validation-over-tls* method even if
       it does not initiate connections to port 443 for HTTP challenges
       so long as either 1) the connection initiated to port 80 serves a
       redirect to the same domain name over HTTPS at port 443 and the
       connection to the domain at port 443 servers a valid, trusted
       certificate or 2) in addition to contacting the domain over port
       80 the CA also contacts the domain over port 443 using HTTPS and
       the connection is established with a valid, trusted certificate
       and the same challenge value is observed.  Operators of security-
       critical domains MAY choose not to permit this method since,
       unlike other cryptographic domain validation methods specified in
       this document, its security relies on the non-existence of
       malicious certificates for a domain at time of the creation of
       the security Property Tag in the domain's policy.

   3.  *known-account-specifier:* For a CA to issue a certificate using
       this method 1) there MUST exist a unique identifier for a CA
       subscriber account that is communicated with the CA out-of-band,
       over authenticated DNS lookups, or in another manner that is
       immune to man-in-the-middle adversaries, and 2) the CA may only
       issue a certificate to an applicant that has authenticated itself
       to the CA as having access to that specified subscriber account.
       A CA does not have permission to issue under this method unless
       both of these criteria are met.  Once these criteria have been
       met, the CA MUST additionally perform a validation method that is
       compliant with the Baseline Requirements for the Issuance and
       Management of Publicly-Trusted TLS Server Certificates.  One
       acceptable way of including this account identifier is with the
       CAA ACME account URI extension, defined in [RFC8657], in an
       authenticated DNS record.

   4.  *private-key-control:* This method involves an applicant showing
       control of a private key that corresponds to a public key placed
       in a DNS record associated with the domain being validated.  The
       private key must be used to sign a message containing: a unique
       identifier for the CA, the domain name(s) in the certificate, a
       timestamp, and a hash of the public key in the certificate.  This
       message may be hashed and then have the signature generated over
       the hash of this message.  Obtaining such a signed message from a
       certificate applicant authorizes the CA specified in the message
       to sign a certificate for those domain names with the specified
       public key within 24h of the timestamp provided in the message.
       The CA MUST retrieve the public key or a hash of the public key
       corresponding to the private key used for signing the message via
       an authenticated DNS lookup using either authenticated channels
       to the relevant authoritative nameservers (e.g., DoH or DoT) or
       validation of a DNSSEC signature chain back to the ICANN root.
       After private key control is established, the CA MUST
       additionally perform a validation method that is compliant with
       the Baseline Requirements for the Issuance and Management of
       Publicly-Trusted TLS Server Certificates.

   In the event that *no methods attribute is specified in the
   attribute-list,* all methods specified in this document are
   acceptable as well as cryptographic domain validation methods defined
   in future RFCs.  Future RFCs MAY specify additional methods for
   cryptographic domain validation so long as they satisfy the
   properties of cryptographic domain validation (i.e., robustness
   against global man-in-the-middle adversaries).

3.2.2.  Permissible Options

   The following options MAY be used in the options or options-critical
   attribute values.

   1.  *authenticated-policy-retrieval:* This option signifies to a CA
       that it MUST retrieve a domain's CAA security Property and any
       associated domain-owner identity (e.g., identifiers used for
       known-account-specifier and private-key-control) using
       authenticated DNS lookups or other authenticated channels.  If a
       CA finds this option in the options-critical attribute and the
       CAA security Property was not retrieved using authenticated DNS
       lookups, the CA MUST NOT issue a certificate for that domain.

   Additionally, a CA MAY choose to honor its own non-standardized
   options that do not need to be supported by other CAs or the IETF.
   These options MUST be prefixed with "ca-<ca_name>-" where ca_name is
   the name of the CA that initially developed the option.

3.3.  Co-existence with other CAA Properties

   The behavior of a CA when encountering a CAA RRset that contains
   multiple CAA Properties, including a security Property, depends on
   the CAA Property Tags.

3.3.1.  CAA security Property

   To minimize complexity and avoid the risk of unexpected behavior, a
   domain's entire cryptographic domain validation policy SHOULD be
   encoded into a single CAA security Property.  If a CAA RRset contains
   multiple security Properties, a CA MUST block issuance if the
   certificate request does not comply with any of the security Tags.
   This ensures that if a new security Property Tag is specified, its
   security properties cannot be subverted by a stale security Property
   Tag.

3.3.2.  CAA issue and issuewild Property

   If a domain specifies both security Properties and a set of issue and
   issuewild Properties, the CA MUST adhere to all security Properties,
   as described above, and the CA MUST adhere to the set of issue and
   issuewild Properties as described in [RFC8659].

3.3.3.  CAA iodef Property

   The usage of the iodef Property is analogous to [RFC8659], i.e., it
   provides a CA the means of reporting certificate issue requests or
   cases of certificate issue for domains for which the Property appears
   in the Relevant RRset, when those requests or issuances violate the
   security policy of the Issuer or the FQDN holder.  The iodef Property
   can be used to inform a domain owner about a blocked issuance due to
   an overly restrictive security Property.

4.  Security Considerations

   Many of the security considerations regarding security CAA records
   are inherited from those of CAA records more generally.  Because
   security CAA records do not introduce any new methods for validating
   domain ownership, they do not increase the attack surface of
   fraudulent validations.  Security CAA records reduce the attack
   surface of fraudulent validations by limiting which validation
   methods may be used and thus eliminating the risk posed by less-
   secure validation methods.  Particularly, domains without a security
   CAA record are often highly vulnerable to man-in-the-middle
   adversaries that can intercept communications from a CA to the
   victim's domain.  The security Property significantly reduces this
   attack surface.

   As with any restriction on certificate issuance, this introduces the
   potential for a Denial of Service (DoS) attack.  There are two
   potential approaches to launching a DoS attack via security CAA
   records.  The first is to attack a domain and spoof the existence of
   a security CAA record in order to prevent the domain owner from
   renewing his or her certificate (presuming the domain under attack
   was not using a validation method compliant with the security CAA
   record).  This attack vector is not novel to security CAA records and
   is enabled solely by following the procedure specified in [RFC8659].
   Per [RFC8659], the presence of any not-understood CAA record with the
   critical flag prevents issuance.  Thus, the adoption of security CAA
   records does not increase the attack surface for this form of DoS
   attack as a gibberish CAA record with the critical flag set could
   lead to the same type of attack.

   A second approach to a DoS attack enabled by security CAA records is
   to target a domain already using a security CAA record and interfere
   with all of the permitted validation methods with the idea that the
   presence of the security CAA will prevent the domain from falling
   back on alternative validation methods.  This attack vector is
   mitigated by the diversity of different methods available to domain
   owners for validating domain ownership using security CAA records.  A
   domain owner may use an alternate method to satisfy the security CAA
   record.  In the event that a domain owner truly cannot satisfy any
   cryptographic domain validation method, the domain owner can still
   mitigate this attack by removing the security CAA record, obtaining a
   certificate, and then reinstating the security CAA record once the
   attack is over.  As with all CAA records, CAs should not cache stale
   CAA record lookups that block issuance and should instead recheck the
   CAA record set when a new issuance request is received.

5.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA actions.

6.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119>.

   [RFC5234]  Crocker, D., Ed. and P. Overell, "Augmented BNF for Syntax
              Specifications: ABNF", STD 68, RFC 5234,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC5234, January 2008,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5234>.

   [RFC7129]  Gieben, R. and W. Mekking, "Authenticated Denial of
              Existence in the DNS", RFC 7129, DOI 10.17487/RFC7129,
              February 2014, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7129>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8174>.

   [RFC8555]  Barnes, R., Hoffman-Andrews, J., McCarney, D., and J.
              Kasten, "Automatic Certificate Management Environment
              (ACME)", RFC 8555, DOI 10.17487/RFC8555, March 2019,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8555>.

   [RFC8657]  Landau, H., "Certification Authority Authorization (CAA)
              Record Extensions for Account URI and Automatic
              Certificate Management Environment (ACME) Method Binding",
              RFC 8657, DOI 10.17487/RFC8657, November 2019,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8657>.

   [RFC8659]  Hallam-Baker, P., Stradling, R., and J. Hoffman-Andrews,
              "DNS Certification Authority Authorization (CAA) Resource
              Record", RFC 8659, DOI 10.17487/RFC8659, November 2019,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8659>.

   [RFC9539]  Gillmor, D. K., Ed., Salazar, J., Ed., and P. Hoffman,
              Ed., "Unilateral Opportunistic Deployment of Encrypted
              Recursive-to-Authoritative DNS", RFC 9539,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC9539, February 2024,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9539>.

Acknowledgments

   TODO acknowledge.

Authors' Addresses

   Henry Birge-Lee
   Princeton University
   Email: birgelee@princeton.edu


   Grace Cimaszewski
   Princeton University
   Email: gcimaszewski@princeton.edu


   Cyrill E. Kr채henb체hl
   Princeton University
   Email: cyrill.k@princeton.edu


   Liang Wang
   Princeton University
   Email: lw19@princeton.edu


   Aaron Gable
   ISRG
   Email: aaron@letsencrypt.org


   Prateek Mittal
   Princeton University
   Email: pmittal@princeton.edu
